You're dog fooding, I imagine.
>> Oh, yes. Yes. Yes.
>> That favorite Silicon Valley phrase,
test on yourself.
>> We call it drink your own champagne.
Yeah. Because it hopefully feels like
champagne. [laughter]
>> This week on Bold Names, I'm talking to
Christian Klein. He's the head of one of
Europe's biggest tech companies, SAP.
Christian rewrote the company's business
playbook when he took over almost 6
years ago. He's going to talk to us
about why it paid off and how he's
working to futureproof the company. Now,
thank you for joining us here on Bold
Names today. You took over SAP in 2020
as the the solo CEO. One of the first
things you did was pretty dramatic. You
announced a complete change of the
business model and your share price
dropped something like 20% in that day.
What was the plan? Yeah, I mean I
started my career here Tim 27
[clears throat] years ago and um you
know some people are saying I'm more a
child of SAP. I started here with
actually even as with 15 years as an
intern and you know when I became the
CEO of SAP it was pretty clear to me
that actually you know the the the ERP
which made SAP so successful for 50
years it's not going to last in the
future.
>> Let me stop you there. ERP that sounds
like a very technical term for the
layman out there.
>> It is actually enterprise resource
planning. So when you want to do
finance, supply chain, payroll, uh HR,
everything integrated, then you need to
buy an ERP. Yeah. But that ERP you know
was not really helping to you know grow
our business in the future and that's
why you know I knew that I have to make
a radical change. The cloud is the
future that was really evident. But then
you needed to disrupt yourself. You need
to disrupt the way how you develop a
product. You need to disrupt the way how
you service your customers, deliver the
product and even you know all the
internal functions. It's a massive
transformation and I was convinced that
this is the only way to make SAP mid and
long-term successful. Yeah. And then you
have to take the risk and you have to
make sometimes in life these bold
decisions.
>> I mean really the the key was just for
the laymen out there.
>> Mhm. you were selling software and
clients were using that on their own
hardware and you were moving to a
business model where the software would
live in the cloud kind of very much like
what Microsoft did for its enterprise
business right I mean this is lots of
companies were moving to the cloud today
it made sense
>> but back then perhaps there was some
nervousness uh this was in the heart of
COVID era shares fell as I said
>> 20% that day what was it like to go home
that evening
>> and see how investors were reacting
Yeah, I mean I probably didn't drink a
glass of water at home. I probably
needed two or three glasses of wine. But
then obviously also one day later also
all the managers the leadership team of
SAP wrote me a nice I would say even
love letter and say Christian it's the
right thing to do. We believe in the
strategy and we're going to follow you.
you know when of course the share price
was down when we did this radical change
I mean people there were of course
concerns questions hey what about the
future of this company are we are going
to make it and in these in these times
you need to actually give people
confidence it it doesn't help now to put
even more pressure into the system you
need to be positive you need to show a
clear plan you need to overcommunicate
you know literally I was always there
every month We reported progress and see
here positive step positive step but
what then also finding the right balance
in different times then to push the bar
to also show the people hey this is not
an industry where we can just stay in
our comfort zone and then finally what I
say was what was very important is also
the mindset of the people yeah when you
are running a cloud business it it was
always about customer satisfaction don't
get me wrong I mean otherwise this
company would not have been successful
but now It's really about adoption. It's
not about selling a piece of software
and the customers implementing it. Now,
now we are on the side of our customers
with every step they go. And that was
actually also a big shift in the way how
we work with our customers. And that
also of course required a lot of change
management to really get this into the
DNA of this company.
You know, I don't know if you know that
looking at this at first blush that you
would necessarily be seen as a change
agent. I think a common business school
perspective is you need to bring an
outsider in to shake up culture.
>> But I know that you've talked about this
idea that actually being an insider
helped you and I wonder why.
>> I mean when you look back into this
transformation first uh it's always
helpful to have a strong network. Yeah.
Because in order to convince people you
need to understand, you know, how do the
people work? How do the different
functions of SAP work? Here in Germany,
we have things called the workers
council. So, you know, you can do a lot
of things, but you cannot do everything
against the workers council. Let me slow
you down there for a second. Workers
council for those not deeply into
European uh labor practices, a workers
council is essentially union in the US,
right?
>> Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. And so and then
you have the ecosystem with the millions
of partners and they also saw a big
change of their business module. So and
you have to understand how does this all
play together in order to make this
transformation work. If you lose one of
those stakeholders, be the employees
firsthand, but then obviously the
customers, the partners, the investors
and other parties like the unions, then
you have a problem. And that's why I
feel it was actually a big plus that I
knew the company inside out. Am I saying
that you always need to hire a C CEO
from inside a company? No. But at the at
a special time like that, I would say
it's rather beneficial.
>> Okay. Okay, so we've talked a lot about
culture change here and I'm interested
in this because I think a lot of
companies are facing this really big
change ahead with the rise of AI. Some
have to look internally to make that
change. Some are looking externally. Uh
ultimately this probably means culture
change for a lot of companies, right?
What are you hearing from customers on
what they see as the biggest
opportunities for AI in 2026
>> in the B2B world? I mean obviously what
moves the needle is supply chain. I mean
you know there when you look into
manufacturing, inventory, logistics, I
mean companies spend a lot of money for
production, for the inventory and
everything what you can really change
from a business perspective with AI is
actually resulting in huge huge benefits
in in a lot of value. The second piece
obviously is when you look at the top
line. Yeah. Now with AI and with the
business AI and with the LLMs, you can
detect consumer trends even better. You
can actually deta tailor your offerings
even more personalized to the consumer's
needs. And then you know these agents
when they talk to each other, they can
actually deliver you the best consumer
experience because they know exactly
what is on the inventory, what can be
shipped by when. And that is of course
you know when you think through how SEP
did run such processes for over 50
years. I mean this will fundamentally
change. Yeah. Because with these agents
you can run that more tailored, more
personalized, more intelligent.
>> Yeah. When we you say the word agents,
you mean AI agents. These these idea of
essentially AI programs designed to do
specific tasks for the consumer or the
client or or whoever. Right.
>> Yes. Exactly. Or the employee. Yeah.
>> As you know, I'm based in San Francisco.
uh kind of the heart of a lot of
conversations around AI, startup AIs in
particular. And I feel like I've had a
lot of meetings in the last few months
with AI startups who think they have the
next big idea to revolutionize those
boring functions within business, right?
The really the things that your company
is known for doing.
>> Mhm.
>> And I presume you think you're probably
better positioned to implement than they
are.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> Why is that the case? because, you know,
history would suggest
>> that green shoot companies can make
bigger changes, can move faster, that
sort of thing, and and and established
companies struggle. Um, but I think you
probably have an argument for why you're
better positioned.
>> Yeah. I mean, Tim, when you when you
look into what SEP does, I mean, we are
running the world's most complex
business processes. And you know to
understand the business process yeah you
need the logic yeah you need the data
module you need to also understand who
is allowed to do what I mean not
everyone in the company is allowed to
run every transaction or to see every
number so and that that business logic
sits within SAP and I absolutely believe
that all of the companies the startups
you are talking to can build an agent on
top of such a system but this agent is
really lacking ing the context it's
lacking the semantical data context. So
all the things what sits in the software
in the business process need to be
understood and there's only one tech
company who wants this mission critical
processes end to end and that's SAP now
but also to be honest him if we are now
not delivering a strong agendic AI layer
within our software who can run those
business processes yeah then we have a
problem but we have this really this big
advantage of having the data and the
business process and a good
understanding of how industries run that
so that our agents when they really have
to work together seamlessly across those
business processes we definitely believe
they know the most they are the smartest
and they can actually really interact
really well across actually the whole
value chain of a company what are some
of the tangible things that you're
seeing right now that your clients your
customers are able to do with with AI in
your system you're sitting on a trove of
huge business data right you have these
companies data in your systems Now that
it's on the cloud, in theory, the AI
agents can better access that data.
Where are we at?
>> Let me share with you, Tim, just two
concrete proposals, uh, two use cases
which we just showed two of our
customers last week. First one, a
retailer. You can shop commerce online
or you can go into a store. In the
future when you go into be the store or
the the online the online shop actually
you're going to get a very tailored
offering based on okay what did you buy
in the past is it raining today is the
sun shining is really making you know
probably a difference on what you want
to buy today for your outfit. The third
part is then obviously okay once you
actually then have the perfect offering
for your consumer. What is actually now
you're running out of stock in the
store. Okay, which warehouse is now
closest? How can I make it work that
when you arrive at home? Ideally, we can
already deliver that that that that
product that stuff. And so that is
something you know where we can now say
hey there are smart agents who can
actually tailor this for you for the
consumer when they entering a store plus
you know really arrange the whole
logistics the whole inventory and run
that and then this another one is cash
flow why are certain consumers not
paying I mean you know there are a lot
of people doing cash collection in uh in
many companies and cash flow performance
matters for your investors for the
financial market and now we can actually
have a very smart agents who really can
track root causes. Why is this an really
an unpaid invoice? Is there an issue
with the product? Is there an issue with
the commercials? Did we not ship the
product in time? And then really figure
out, okay, uh let's really go and
collaborate with the supplier,
collaborate with the service in order to
get this, you know, outstanding payment
really in much faster than in the past.
And these are of course super attractive
use cases for a CFO for a treasurer and
we actually delivering those agents now
in every function and I have to say we
are really amazed about the proquest the
technology is making but obviously then
how we can plug it into the businesses
of our customers. You know, one of the
things I think is interesting is that
you're not out there trying to create
your own model, right? Like what OpenAI
is trying to do or Google is doing with
Gemini or
>> uh you're partnering you've got you
partnered with Anthropic on Claude. But
what's to say that these models just
can't replace your business going
forward?
>> Yeah, I mean Tim actually very good
question and here I mean we we are
partner indeed. We are not building our
own large language module but what we
are building is our AI foundation for
business data and because I mean the
LLMs are super smart and understand you
know unstructured content in really you
know actually also of course helps a lot
with human process language but at the
end of the day they also you need to
enable them to correlate it with
business data because the good place is
that these LLMs have no access to a
financial data of a company or HR data
or payroll data and that is that is what
an SEP brings to it. Yeah. So that we
can contextualize
>> a wall if you will it protects the
sanctity of that data.
>> Exactly. Exactly. And you know there's
you know billions of data points in
inside a company and how does the large
language model when you actually ask
this is our digital assistant similar to
co-pilot when you ask a question hey um
for this piece here what I need to
procure I mean this product give me the
the five suppliers who can deliver it in
with of course in time at the lowest
cost with you know which we also knew
they have great quality and maybe even
the most sustainable way. And in the
past actually, you know, there was of
course procurement searching through
thousands of suppliers. Now there is
this digital chatbot called Jewel. Jewel
is now enabled to understand your
question. But in order to understand
your question, you need to be able to
correlate, you know, the chat GBT with
the business data, with your supplier
data, with your with your uh financial
data. And this is where SEP where our AI
foundation kicks in. And that is exactly
why we have such a strong belief that
SEP will be a leader in business AI.
>> I'm curious as you talk to your your
customers about AI.
>> Yeah.
>> Um you know what are you what are you
doing internally? How are you using AI
to change the the way you are operating
as a company?
>> You're dog fooding, I imagine.
>> Oh yes yes
>> that favorite Silicon Valley phrase to
test on [laughter] yourself.
>> Yeah. We we call it drink your own
champagne. Yeah. Because it hopefully
feels like champagne. [laughter]
Uh no look uh again yeah in order to be
credible uh to our customers I mean you
know the you know you don't get any
software deal anymore through the door
if you cannot really have a convincing
agentic AI story and how how it helps
their business. So we need to be a role
model and apply AI by ourselves and we
actually going it goes across the
company take I mean software development
is probably the easiest one code
generation automated testing self
configuration I mean a lot can be really
automated already today so we are using
our old code generation tools jewel tool
for developer we have GitHub and other
tools second piece obviously is when you
are in sales I mean every deal we are
doing right now there's an AI agent
helping to figure out the right price,
the right package. Oh, we sold this deal
a million times in this industry. Let me
help you. I would actually configure
that with these and these services
because it makes your offer even more
attractive. So that is what is happening
in sales and then downstream there is a
chandicai helping us okay here you have
this position based on the skills based
on the experience based on some other
factors what you are looking for here
are the three top talents in this
company which we actually believe could
be uh you know a candidate for that role
in the future and or if you do
recruiting yeah we have a lot of jobs
which we now need because of AI and this
is where we actually have a recruiting
agent helping you know to squeeze keen
in making sure we are finding the best
talents in the market and now I could go
on and on and on Tim but it's very
important one thing and I guess this is
something
>> what everyone needs to understand this
is not actually implementing a piece of
technology and magically it works I mean
there's a lot of change management you
need to train the people how to use
those agents yeah what is changing then
for myself for my daily life so there is
not only that you can just say oh I'm
implementing today this AI use case no
there is a huge change management effort
what you have to do in order to make
ensure that the end users also adopting
the AI.
>> Let's let's zoom out a little bit. We'll
zoom out a lot. SAP global company
obviously founded in Europe. You're
you're talking to me in Germany. Uh
Europe is a is a part of the world
that's not necessarily seen as the big
tech hub. It may be lagging in the tech
space, if you will.
>> Why is that? What needs to change? Yeah,
I mean Europe is definitely a place in
the world where I feel often times we
think about the risks first and then
regulate before we even start
innovating. And I see, you know, in the
United States, but as well as in Asia,
in China, I actually see that it's going
the other way. Let's first innovate and
then we can still, you know, do the
regulation if we see, you know, there is
a bad outcome for societies, etc. But
this is of course not helping especially
not young startups where you have to
move with agility where you have to move
with speed and then finally um also the
European Union is not really a union
also not for tech companies I mean every
you know member state has its own
regulation so and then Europe Brussels
come with one on top so that is you know
not what you need in order to scale your
business fast and these are some of the
reasons why I would say where Europe
definitely has to change in in order to
hopefully at some point also have
another SAP here. Yeah,
>> Brussels, where the European Union is
based, the European Commission operates
out. The European Union has been
aggressive in some tech um regulating in
recent years, including uh passing um
legislation about AI, AI rules. Uh
recently the European Commission um has
talked about pausing um some of those
rules out of concerns about competition.
Do you think that the EU is moving in
the right direction now? Yeah, I mean I
I definitely feel they eager to listen,
but you know listening is a first good
step, but then the second step is now
taking action and that is now the proof
is still out and the jury is still out.
So Tim, I would I would love to say to
you it's moving in the right direction,
but I would say when we talk again in
three months from now, probably I can I
can really say is it really moving in
the right direction? Well, maybe we
should talk bigger picture than just
about the tech European tech industry in
general. What does the European tech
industry need to do to not just catch up
with the US and Chinese competition, but
to beat them?
>> Yeah, it's um yeah, it's a it's it's a
good question and there's a a heated
discussion even in Europe about that
because, you know, the European Union
decided to fund certain gigafactories.
Yeah. To actually also deploy AI across
Europe. But I'm actually I was a bit
skeptical. I'm still skeptical because
look at the energy cost in Germany.
That's super high. So and we are not
having you know an open AI in the
country. We are having not an entropic.
So training LLMs is not necessarily
something what we need in this country
because we don't not having this these
companies. Now what Europe should do is
not just you know taking you know the
same route as the US does or China does.
what our strengths are. I mean we are
good in manufacturing, we are still good
in automotive despite they in a huge
transformation as well. We are good in
utilities in chemical and we have a lot
of data there. So we have expertise and
data. So we should be the world's leader
in applying AI in order to be the best
in running these utilities in the future
in order to be the produce the best EV
cars in the future at the lower at lower
cost than today. And this is something
yeah where we what we should focus on.
So let's build really these modules by
industry applying them in our business
context. Yeah. Because this is where
Europe can still win and then of course
when infrastructure when when gigaf
factories are needed okay build them but
we should rather do it the other way
around and start with applying AI first.
>> Christian thank you so much. This was a
great conversation. I look forward to
talking to you again in the future.
>> Yeah thanks a lot Tim. We reached out to
the European Commission and a spokesman
said that building large-scale AI
infrastructure in Europe is quote
central to support research, startups,
and industry while maintaining strategic
autonomy end quote.
>> [music]